---
layout:     post
title:      "Going static"
subtitle:   "How I got to love statically generated websites."
date:       2017-04-05 10:00:00
author:     "Viviane"
tags: 
    - tech
---

I first discovered static websites about two years ago and now I have 6 repos on
my machine which are static sites with almost as many hosting situations and development 
processes. Let me tell you how I got there. First, for readers who do not have a clear
idea of what I mean by static website, here is a general idea of how websites work.

# Dynamic / static, some basics 

All website work basically the same way. You type a url *http://www.mywebsite.com/myfile.html*
and this is somehow directed to an actual physical machine (through DNS) to which you
send a "request", for example *give me "myfile.html"* (your browser makes the request
for you, using the language of http). Your machine is called *the client* and the distant
one where the website is hosted is called *the server*. The way the server handles
this request then depends on what kind of website you are visiting.

If it's a **static website**, then the server role is only to check if the file exists
and give it to you. On the other hand, if it's a **dynamic website**, there is a program
running on the server side that looks at your request and *generates* the html content
to be sent on the fly. This part can be written in many different *server side* languages
such as PHP, python, ruby, java, nodeJS, etc. This also often includes some database lookup. 

Many websites *need* to be dynamic. Indeed some requests require more than just sending back
some html content, they imply some other actions. For example, when you buy something
online, the program on the server will take your payment details, send them to your bank, check
for the bank answer, inform the warehouse that you just bought something and update
the product database accordingly. You basically have a whole *software* running on 
the server. Also, most websites have their content stored in databases and so any 
page viewing require some server actions. The server side software car be written
from scratch or based on some *framework* like Django or Symphony, or even, you just install
a certain software that is designed for your needs like Worpress. You can safely 
assume that most of the websites you look at in your day to day life are dynamic (except for this one!).

But maintaining a dynamic website is not simple. Indeed, depending on your server side
software, you will need a bunch of different programs installed on the machine and
running 24/7. To set up the server, you definitely need some sys-admin knowledge.
And if you have a limited access to the server administration, you might not be able 
to do what you want. For a simple personal website, or a small information website,
this might get quite heavy.

That's where the solution of a static website comes in hand. It is a good solution if
the content on the website does not depend on any action of the user: basically, 
your site is just a collection of pages. Of course, there is the hassle of writing
all those pages and updating them. For example, a blog is mostly a collection of
blog posts, each blog post being one single page. But every time I write a new post,
the home page needs also to be updated to add the new link. The solution is to use
a software that automatically generates those pages. The difference with a dynamic
website is that it is generated *beforehand*: not when the user request it, but whenever 
the content is changed. This generation can happen anywhere (for example, on your own
computer) and then the generated files are copied over to the server. 

# Github pages and Jekyll

The first time I discovered such a system was when I heard of [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) and Github pages.
It was at the beginning of our European project [OpenDreamKit](http://opendreamkit.org/).
Since then, the website has been completely rebuilt but the first version was already
using Jekyll. I was very easily seduced with the development process and started
playing around. In this case, github takes care of most of the trouble for you. First
thing to know is that github can offer you some very basic hosting service for your 
projects: basically you put some html files in some repo and tell github that this is 
a website. You're given an access url and also means to redirect your domain name
to your github website.

But there is more: Github offers you a Jekyll service. In this case, you website 
source is hosted on a github repo but it is not directly html files. Your content is 
stored in some text files that you can directly edit: each page or post is a single 
file that contains some parameters and the actual content (written in [Markdown](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown)).
The source also contains some configuration files and some html templates. Whenever
you push on your repo, Github runs Jekyll, generates the html files and update your
website. Note that there is a dynamic part here, taken care by Github. Still, it is
a static website in the sense that the content is generated not when the user asks 
for it but whenever you change the content. 

It is a very great service and very easy to use. To better understand the process,
you can of course clone your website repo locally and run jekyll yourself. Then, you
will see your html files the way they are generated on github. This is what I
quickly did because I had to make non trivial changes on the website and wanted to
be able to test it locally. But the good part is: not everyone needs to do it. On
the OpenDreamKit project, we are about 50 people involved. We all have access to the
github repo and can use the online github editing service to push changes to the website.
And, the whole collaborative aspects of 50 people working on a shared project is handled
through git, with commits, and merge, and versionning, and every thing, which is a big
plus.

I was so much seduced by the system that a few months later, when I thought of
creating this blog, I decided to use the same system. It had been some time already
that most of my computer data was managed through git. The idea of managing my website 
through command line, text files and git push was very pleasing and felt so very simple.
And indeed, it was probably the easiest site deployment ever. For once, I used a ready
made theme and everything went smoothly. The only thing I had to worry about was 
the commenting system. Indeed, comments are the only part in a blog which actually 
require a dynamic server. I first tried to use some kind of remote database hosting
that supposedly would let me store my comments and pull them as static content. After
a few month however, it stopped working. I must say, I just did not have to the time
to investigate other solutions. I moved to [Disqus](https://disqus.com/): it is
definitely not the ideal solution but, well, it works.

# Discovering Pelican

Some time after that, I volunteered to develop my [research team website](https://galac.lri.fr/). It was 
to be hosted on our department server. For the source, I figured we needed a git repo 
as I certainly did not want to be the only contributor once the site was live. To host
the repo, I could use the gitlab install that was also on the department server which
would allow easy access to any member of the team. And of course, I thought that a static
generated website was a good solution.

Because I was not going to use the github page system, I did not have to use Jekyll. I
looked around to learn about other solutions and came across [Pelican](http://docs.getpelican.com). I 
hesitated quite a bit: indeed I already knew Jekyll, why would I take the trouble
to learn another system? At the end, after reading a bit, I still chose Pelican. The fact
that it was written in python was a big plus: no gem magic going on. Also, it had
a very good multi-language plugin (I use i18n). And I must say, I am quite happy 
with my choice. 

Now that I know both systems quite well, I still have a slightest preference for Pelican.
One thing is that I find the architecture clearer: the content is better separated
from the configuration and templates. Also, I like very much the fact that I can 
write my own plugins. If you use Jekyll through a github page system, you cannot
install nor write extra plugins. Also, the plugins are in ruby which is somehow exotic
for me. In Pelican, the plugins are just some python files and I got the hang of it 
very quickly.

Whenever I could not find something doing what I wanted, I wrote my own plugin. I did a "drop down menu plugin",
and a "articles on page" plugin, and some others. I wrote my own theme based on [Bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com/).
 I used the posts, categories and tags to organize the website content in a engaging way that clearly 
put forward our team activities. The result was nice and my team was very happy.

One problem though was to get some kind of *continuons integration*: basically, it's
great to have a git repo where other people can contribute but I also want the 
website to automatically update whenever there is a push. This is the part that
is taken care of by Github when you use Jekyll. Here I had no github to do the job 
for me... I could have looked into gitlab internals and set up a hook or something
to some port on the department server that would trigger a script. But I didn't:
it looked like too much work and I didn't want to open any kind of security breach.
So... I used a very basic system: I set up a cron task on my own space which pulled
the website and regenerated it every 15 minutes... It is not perfect but it does work! 
With this plus the repo, I wouldn't say I got all my team to contribute but after
minimal explanations, I did get a few! And, I must say, the website mostly runs without
my help.

Quite motivated by this first experience, I then decided to re-write [my own academic website](https://www.lri.fr/~pons/)
using Pelican. I had more experience with Pelican, less constraints and I did not 
need any continuous integration. Again, I wrote my own theme using my growing Bootstrap
experience and copying over some nice things around. And I got my perfect website
fully working, easily manageable, using a clever categories / tag system to make
it a great showcase of all my academic activities. 

# Back to Jekyll

At this point, I had built 3 statically generated websites: my blog on Jekyll,
and 2 websites on Pelican. And I was about to build a fourth one. Indeed, our original
[OpenDreamKit](http://opendreamkit.org/) website had many flaws and we were thinking on rebuilding it entirely. 
I took this on me and got back to playing around with Jekyll, trying to adapt some
of my Pelican ideas. I was a big fan of my own tag system to organize my academic activities
and wanted something similar for OpenDreamKit. I got there but it was not that easy.
Indeed, unlike Pelican, Jekyll does not have a good native tag system. And because
you cannot install any plugins on a github website, I needed to develop that solely 
through the templating language (liquid) which is somehow a challenge. But it worked!
And I also rediscovered things I like about Jekyll and miss in Pelican like collections, 
and yml data files. For example, we got our latex proposal file to compile some yml
data describing the project (like WorkPackages, tasks and Deliverables) that we could
use on the website. The new website was a big hit and had great success among the 
other participants.

# The big Worpress to Pelican challenge

After all this, I still had an itch to scratch. Somewhere on the web, lies
my old travel blog. It is 12 years old and had been running on Worpress since 2009.
It is not dead: I update it whenever I travel. But I could not remember when I last
updated the wordpress version. The theme itself, I had wrote it myself back in 2009. So
it was old, many things were broken, many things were out of date. Probably, it had 
at least a few security breaches. And the sole idea of putting my head into php code
tired me. I had nothing against Worpress which had been the perfect companion for many 
years. But I had moved on... And so, it stroke me: I had to move it to Pelican.

This was not a trivial move. My blog has more than 400 posts so no manual action was possible.
Thankfully, Wordpress is quite cleverly made and offers an xml export. And, even better,
Pelican offers an import from the Worpress xml. It did not work perfectly. Some of 
my content was chunked for unknown reason. My categories were all messed up (I used 
multiple categories which is not supported by Pelican). My fix included many
little home made scripts to search and replace and inspect the Worpress xml myself.
At the end, it was mostly fun to write. It gave me an occasion to go through all
my old posts and travels, and re-arrange as I thought best. And there it was,
I had my new blog just there on my machine!

The last step was to find a solution to host it. I already had a server so I could 
just have reused it but my problem came again from the *continuous integration*. Indeed,
for my academic website, I can just regenerate the site whenever I change something.
But for my blog, I usually write *on the road*. Recently, mostly from my phone. I don't
always have a computer with me to turn on whenever I want to publish a post. So I looked 
around, and here it was: [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/) was proposing this exact service!
I found it was very easy to put in place. They had a redirect system which looked
like an htaccess file and, using my home-made scripts, I genereated a whole
map from my old urls to the new ones. As soon as DNS server had updated my
changes, I had my new site up and running! Here it is: [Viviane Voyage](http://www.viviane-voyages.com/).

And now I am happy: all my websites are managed through text files and git pushes. 
I only miss one thing: a GitHub android application that would allow me to commit and
push without a fully local cloned copy of the repo. Indeed, I do have git on my phone
(nerdy me), but I don't want a clone of my 400-posts-and-many-pictures travel
blog on it! The only solution is to use github website (and explicitly require the desktop version)
but it is not very handy. Still, I'm hoping this will be available at some point in the
near future. 


